---
title: Change Mac OS X user Limits
layout: post
permalink: /2012/06/Change Mac OS X user Limits/
date: Fri Jun 15 21:31:14 CST 2012
published: true
pygments: true
---

如何修改max os x关于用户的配额限制，主要是进程数和文件句柄数。

I always had a process limitation problem on OSX. You may encounter this when you open too much applications. In my case, using iTerm, I easyily open far too much shells to servers I have to deal with.

You will then get a « login: fork: Resource temporarily unavailable » error message. When trying to start a new application, you will barely see the icon in the dock, then it will disapear. Now you’re in Troubble !

Hopefully, as OS X is a UNIX system, you have a solution. The only bad side is that you will have to reboot.

If you are running Leopard (10.5.x), using the first trick will lead you to the Windows Server not running… Pretty anoying. Use SSH and put back the Windowserver in its place. This is what I did, with the help of the blog at http://ruminate.net/pdm :

Sudo -s to get a root shell. Then create the two files like :

<div class="quote_title">引用</div>
<div class="quote_div">/etc/launchd.conf</div>


{% highlight js linenos %}
	cat /etc/launchd.conf
	
	limit maxproc 512 2048
	limit maxfiles 512 unlimited

{% endhighlight %}


<div class="quote_title">引用</div>
<div class="quote_div">/etc/sysctl.conf</div>


{% highlight js linenos %}
	cat /etc/sysctl.conf
	
	# Turn up maxproc
	kern.maxproc=2048
	
	# Turn up the maxproc per user
	kern.maxprocperuid=1024
	
	# Remove core files
	kern.coredump=0

{% endhighlight %}


After a reboot, your max user process will be raised to 512 :

{% highlight js linenos %}
	ulimit -a
	core file size          (blocks, -c) 0
	data seg size           (kbytes, -d) 6144
	file size               (blocks, -f) unlimited
	max locked memory       (kbytes, -l) unlimited
	max memory size         (kbytes, -m) unlimited
	open files                      (-n) 512
	pipe size            (512 bytes, -p) 1
	stack size              (kbytes, -s) 8192
	cpu time               (seconds, -t) unlimited
	max user processes              (-u) 512
	virtual memory          (kbytes, -v) unlimited

{% endhighlight %}

